Dr. Joseph Park doesn’t need to see any more replays. The first time he saw Indiana Pacers star guard Tyrese Haliburton fall to the floor in pain Sunday night during the first quarter of Game 7 of the NBA Finals was more than enough.

“While many people were fascinated by the video clip of his Achilles (tendon) rupturing in slow motion,” Park said, “I am truly unable to watch as I know what these athletes will go through for the next several months.”

Park is the University of Virginia's professor of orthopedic surgery and chief of the foot and ankle division in the Department of Orthopedic Surgery at UVA Health. The 2004 School of Medicine alumnus also serves as the team foot and ankle surgeon for UVA Athletics. His research interests include sports-related injuries and tendon reconstruction. 

Naturally, he’s been engaged in numerous conversations within his profession stemming from the latest notable NBA player to injure his Achilles tendon, located at the back of the leg above the ankle.

Haliburton’s right Achilles tendon tear, which required surgery Monday in advance of an expected lengthy recovery period, was the third such injury to an NBA player during the playoffs, following similar injuries suffered by the Milwaukee Bucks’ Damian Lillard and the Boston Celtics’ Jayson Tatum. Four other players sustained the injury during the regular season.

Forbes, citing a study published in the Orthopedics Journal of Sports Medicine, reported this week the average number of Achilles tendon tears among NBA players per season from 1990 to 2023 was only 1.36.

Park has many theories on why the sudden uptick, including overall fatigue from inadequate rest to meet a rigorous schedule that extends beyond the 82-game regular season and into the grueling playoffs and then, for some players, international competitions in the summer. 

“Nonathletes sustain Achilles ruptures at a rate of eight to 10 ruptures per 100,000 people per year,” Park said. “In elite-level athletes, this number may be doubled, up to 20 ruptures per 100,000 people per year. The rate is definitely increasing for all age groups. … Achilles ruptures occur much more frequently in male patients, usually while participating in sports such as basketball or soccer, and now pickleball.”

Whether you’re an NBA player or a recreational athlete, the causes of an Achilles tendon tear can be the same, Park said. 

“The Achilles tendon is known to become less flexible as we age, putting us at a higher risk of rupture once the elasticity of the tendon cannot accommodate the force applied through the tendon,” he said. “Factors such as inadequate warm-up, hamstring tightness, repetitive high-impact exercises, and early focused participation in one sport have been suggested as reasons for the recent increase in Achilles ruptures.

“Higher rates of participation in sports activities in older patients may also play a role.”

Park’s Achilles tendon-tear patients have described the feeling of the injury as being shot or kicked hard in the ankle. Some have heard an audible pop at impact. 

“Since swelling is often rapid,” he said, “many Achilles ruptures may be mistaken for an ankle sprain if the rupture is not as dramatic.  

“The Thompson test, where the ankle does not plantarflex, or push down, when the calf is squeezed, is often positive for an acute rupture. If Achilles rupture is suspected, the ankle should be immobilized with the foot in a plantarflexed position, pointing down, as this will decrease the gap at the rupture site.  

“Since many ruptures can be treated without surgery, this early immobilization will enable selection of either treatment plan.”

To help prevent an Achilles injury, where the recovery time can last up to a year, Park suggests dynamic warmup sessions before a physical activity – with light jogging, squats, lunges or calf raises – and adequate rest and recovery after it’s ended. 

“For younger patients who are still growing,” Park said, “delaying heavy weightlifting until growth is complete may allow the Achilles tendon to adequately adapt to these increased loads.  

“I encourage all of my patients to participate in yoga, which combines dynamic and static stretching. I also believe cross-training and youth participation in more than one sport may decrease the rate of Achilles tendon ruptures.”