BASEBALL: Taking a Swing With Steroids By: Lee Jenkins
In the four-tenths of a second it takes for a 101-mile-an-hour fastball to fly from the pitcher's hand to home plate, the San Francisco Giants slugger Barry Bonds sizes up the seams and gauges the spin, projects where the ball is headed and decides what he wants to do with it.

One night this season, Bonds used this sliver of time to plant his right foot, jackhammer his hips and thrust his hands so violently that he yanked the ball out of the stadium, about 60 feet foul.

Around SBC Park in San Francisco, fans seemed torn between applauding the blow and debating it. In a press-box seat, one reporter said to another, ''Steroids can't do that.'' And, inevitably, the response rang out:

''How do you know?''

Such is the interchange defining a sport divided -- between those who speculate about the role of steroids in every game, and those in awe over a Bonds blast or some utility infielder's opposite-field home run.

Until last year, baseball spurned testing for steroids, partly because of the perception that steroids were for football players and bodybuilders. Ingrained in the American consciousness is the belief that baseball requires too many skills based on hand-eye coordination and savvy. When Bobby Valentine, the former Texas Rangers and Mets manager, was once asked about Bonds and steroids, he said, ''Does he shoot them in his eyes?''

Steroids, of course, are not injected in the eyes. But their uncertain influence on a player's strength, bat speed, hand-eye coordination and confidence has become a source of debate and a backdrop to the 2004 baseball season, particularly in the wake of a federal investigation into steroid distribution in the Balco case and the grand jury testimony of Bonds, Gary Sheffield, Jason Giambi and other players. In subtle ways, steroids course through every artery of the game.

To go through one at-bat with a steroid user, you would have to find him. No active major leaguer has been positively identified for steroid use, so only a composite is available.

The player might have discovered an anabolic steroid while playing

winter ball in Latin America, where steroids are widely available at local drug stores. He might have remembered that the former major league slugger Jose Canseco once said that 85 percent of major leaguers used steroids, or that another former player, Ken Caminiti, contended that 50 percent took them.

Despite warnings that steroids increase the rate of heart attacks, the amount of cholesterol in the body and the risk of sterility, the player takes an initial cycle, either ingesting the steroids orally or injecting them into his buttocks. Some scientists have established that steroids add muscle mass even if the user does not train, but the player is eager to maximize results, so he continues a fierce workout routine.

''Even those who don't train get stronger,'' Dr. Benjamin Z. Leder of Massachusetts General Hospital said. ''But I don't know of any world-class athlete who doesn't train, so it's always in combination.''

Major League Baseball and the players union commissioned Leder and his colleague, Dr. Joel S. Finkelstein, to conduct a study on the supplement androstenedione in 2000, but baseball and union officials say no such study has ever been administered to determine the influence of steroids on baseball players.

''We have to get away from the perception that steroids are just for muscle-bound bodybuilders,'' said Frank Uryasz, president of the National Center for Drug Free Sports, an sports drug-testing company based in Kansas City, Mo. ''In a perfect world, we'd take a pool of baseball players and give half of them steroids to see what would happen. But we're not going to do that.''

Better Workouts and More Confidence

The broadcaster Bob Costas said that 10 years ago he believed there was no reason for a baseball player to take steroids. Now, he marvels at the accomplishments of contemporary stars, but he also wonders about them.

''You still have to hit the ball,'' Costas said. ''If you put rocket fuel in a Honda, it doesn't mean it would win the Indy 500. But if you had two genuine racing cars and one got the rocket fuel and another got regular fuel, then it makes a difference.''

The difference shows up in various ways. As the juiced player continues his off-season cycle, he is able to work out longer and more often. Trainers tell him that when muscles are stressed, they usually become fatigued and break down, a catabolic effect. Anabolic steroids override the catabolic effect and shorten the recovery time from workouts.

On opening day, when the player walks to home plate, he has a new build and a fresh outlook. According to Dr. Harrison Pope, director of the biological psychiatry laboratory at McLean Hospital/Harvard Medical Center, the player will have become more muscular in the shoulders, neck and upper arms. ''He starts to look more male than male,'' Pope said.

During 20 years of researching anabolic steroids, Pope has had countless athletes tell him they feel invincible when performing with steroids, providing a psychological edge on par with the physical advantage. The first-year user could very well be a decent career hitter, already possessing the skills necessary to play baseball, but he has observed in recent batting practice sessions that his fly balls are carrying 15 to 20 feet farther.

''I've never taken the stuff, but talking to guys who have, they get a lot of extra confidence,'' Mets outfielder Cliff Floyd said. ''They think, 'When I hit the ball, it will go farther than when I hit it before.' They have this different attitude, like they're invincible, and they're just going to crush it. I think that's the real edge.''

When fans and teammates get their first glimpse of the player, they may wonder about his off-season regimen. They may check to see if his facial structure has changed, causing his helmet to ride high on his head. But Dr. Alan D. Rogol, who has worked with the United States Anti-Doping Agency, warns against such superficial judgments for any athlete under the age of 30.

''A boy at 17 might finish growing, but your adult composition is in no way complete,'' said Rogol, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Virginia. ''It could take 10 more years to get peak bone mass and muscle mass. Part of that is training and part is the maturation process. On the other hand, if you've been playing 10 or 12 years, and you're 35 and put on 40 pounds and are ripped and totally different, that's harder to deal with. Then I'd have to think twice.''

In his first regular-season at-bat with steroids in his system, the player digs into the batter's box and tries to calm himself. Scientists believe steroids can heighten aggression, which could help the player attack a pitch with greater force, or hurt him because he will chase too many bad pitches. Whether a result of power pitchers, smaller ballparks or steroids, recent years have had the most home runs in history, but also the most strikeouts.

''Much has been made of 'roid rage,'' said Dr. Allan Lans, a sports psychologist who has worked with the Mets and players for other teams. ''In baseball, aggressiveness is to be a very controlled kind of thing. If you don't have control, it becomes detrimental to your performance. Even at the plate, what's required is focus and concentration. You can't use steroids for something like that.''

Scientists say they do not believe steroids improve hand-eye coordination, but because they agree the drugs help build strength, some extrapolate that steroids would also quicken bat speed. Better bat speed gives the hitter more time to wait on a pitch, to read it and follow it. The player most likely has an extra split second to decide what pitch is approaching and whether he wants to swing at it.

''Steroids make your hands faster in that they increase muscle in your forearms and pectorals and numerous muscle sets involved in hitting a baseball,'' said Dr. Charles Yesalis, professor of health and human development at Penn State. ''If you need less time to get around on the ball, you have more time to tell if it's a slider, knuckleball or curve. That makes complete sense.''

When the player does start his swing, the steroids are really put to work. He is able to jerk the bat around faster, creating power from his arms, chest, shoulders and neck. ''It's basic force equals mass times acceleration,'' said Dr. Gary I. Wadler, professor of medicine at New York University, who has spent 20 years studying doping. ''The mass is muscle and the acceleration is the bat speed. There is a collision. The ball is being hit with more force than before and will go farther.''

After the player makes contact, he looks up at the field and is met with surprise. The pitcher, who has faced the player numerous times in the past, appears suddenly suspicious. ''You see guys who had warning-track power, and now the ball is going over the fence,'' Mets pitcher Tom Glavine said. ''We're in a day and age when everyone's suspected of something. There are players who work hard, but when a guy comes out of nowhere, you wonder what's going on.''

Pitchers have also been known to take steroids, not necessarily to throw harder, but rather to rebound more quickly from their previous start. Even though steroids can take away some of the flexibility and whip action that allows a pitcher to throw a baseball, they decrease the tissue breakdown that comes from throwing around 90 pitches a game.

''I never thought there was a reason for pitchers to do it,'' Glavine said. ''I'm not so sure anymore.'''

A Burst Out of the Box

As the player steps out of the batter's box, he does not necessarily have more speed, but he does possess greater explosiveness, because of stronger fast-twitch muscle fibers. When Caminiti admitted to Sports Illustrated in 2002 that he used steroids, he said: ''I'd be running the bases and think, 'Man, I'm fast!' And I had never been fast.''

Wadler said: ''Remember Ben Johnson coming out of the starting blocks in the 100 meters at the 1988 Olympics? It's just like that.''

(Johnson, a Canadian sprinter, was stripped of his gold medal after testing positive for steroids.)

By the time the player touches first base, he can hear the cheers wash over him, and he accepts them without much guilt. Many athletes on steroids attribute their success to their strenuous workout routines, refusing to acknowledge that steroids often make those routines possible.

''He'll feel like, 'I've earned this because I work out all the time,''' Lans said. ''It's a mind-set people have about success. Someone believes, 'This will get me over the top,' and they do it and then find a way to validate it.''

Given the state of justice in Major League Baseball, the user will probably be punished only by his own body. As he continues to develop, he could lose flexibility and his muscles might become so strong that the tendons will no longer be able to connect them to the bone. Doctors have seen an increasing number of elbow injuries, knee injuries and tendon ruptures, in which the muscle strips completely away from the bone.

''The muscle mass gets so great that the tendons sometimes can't carry the weight,'' said Dr. Robert J. Dimeff, director of sports medicine at the Cleveland Clinic.

Steroids can assist in the healing process. To strengthen tissue and put more time into rehabilitation, the player will be tempted to begin using again, starting the cycle over.

Steroids help as the years pass, staving off the aging process with more and more muscle. Balls carry farther. Careers extend longer. Numbers reach higher. And the questions grow louder.